Context. Abbreviations are used frequently in pathology reports and
medical records. Efforts to identify and organize free-text concepts
must correctly interpret medical abbreviations. During the past
decade, the author has collected more than 12000 medical
abbreviations, concentrating on terms used or interpreted by
pathologists.  

Objective. The purpose of the study is to provide readers with a
listing of abbreviations. The listing of abbreviations is reviewed for
the purpose of determining the variety of ways that long forms are
shortened.  

Design. Abbreviations fell into different classes. These classes
seemed amenable to distinct algorithmic approaches to their correct
expansions. A discussion of these abbreviation classes was included to
assist informaticians who are searching for ways to write software
that expands abbreviations found in medical text. Classes were
separated by the algorithmic approaches that could be used to map
abbreviations to their correct expansions. A Perl implementation was
developed to automatically match expansions with Unified Medical
Language System concepts.  

Measurements. The abbreviation list contained 12097 terms; 5772
abbreviations had unique expansions. There were 6325 polysemous
abbreviation/expansion pairs. The expansions of 8599 abbreviations
mapped to Unified Medical Language System concepts. Three hundred
twenty-four abbreviations could be confused with unabbreviated words.
Two hundred thirteen abbreviations had different expansions depending
on whether the American or the British spellings were used. Nine
hundred seventy abbreviations ended in the letter s.  

Results. There were 6 nonexclusive groups of abbreviations classed by
expansion algorithm, as follows: (1) ephemeral; (2) hyponymous; (3)
monosemous; (4) polysemous; (5) masqueraders of common words; and (6)
fatal (abbreviations whose incorrect expansions could easily result in
clinical errors).  

Conclusion. Collecting and classifying abbreviations creates a logical
approach to the development of class-specific algorithms designed to
expand abbreviations. A large listing of medical abbreviations is
placed into the public domain. The most current version is available
at http://www.julesberman.info/abbtwo.htm  

Expanding and removing the ambiguity from abbreviations is one of the
more challenging issues in natural language parsing. Collecting and
classifying abbreviations is a necessary exercise. It is the first
step toward developing algorithmic strategies to assign the correct
expansions for medical abbreviations parsed from text.  
Most medical abbreviations were no doubt invented as time-savers for
health professionals. These same abbreviations can waste the time of
those persons tasked with organizing, indexing, searching, or
interpreting medical text. Those reading a medical record are expected
to know that ga occurring within an obstetric history usually means
gestational age, while ga occurring within a dermatologic history
usually means granuloma annulare. Automatic indexers and machine
translators of medical text require large and accurate lists of
medical abbreviations and accurate algorithms to find abbreviations
within text and to map the abbreviations to their correct expansions.
Also required is an understanding of the types of problems encountered
when abbreviations are expanded.  

A PubMed search on biomedical AND abbreviations reveals that most
literature contributions to the field consist of outraged editorials
and letters decrying the inappropriate use of abbreviations.
Strangely, the problem of correctly expanding free-text abbreviations
into standard terminology has received very little serious attention
in the medical informatics literature.1-3 In an early study in which
the words from medical reports were enumerated, there was no mention
whatsoever of abbreviations.4 Recently, Liu et al3 studied a set of
abbreviations that could be algorithmically extracted from the Unified
Medical Language System (UMLS), extracting 163666
abbreviation/expansion pairs.3 These authors noted that many
abbreviations have multiple different expansions and that the
expansions cannot always be disambiguated based on separating
abbreviations by their knowledge domain. Liu et al3 indicated that
methods are needed to remove the ambiguity from ambiguous
abbreviations. The current study involves a hand-annotated listing of
about 12000 abbreviations, many of which were encountered in pathology
reports and pathology literature.  

Medical abbreviations come in 2 forms: acronyms and shortened words.
Acronyms are character strings usually composed from the first letters
of a text phrase. Many acronyms are noun phrases. A straightforward
example is CABG, which stands for coronary artery bypass graft.  
There are relatively few abbreviations for adjectives. Examples
include the following: AP = anterior-posterior; L = left. There are
almost no abbreviations for verbs.  

A shortened form is a subset of letters taken from a word; the letters
almost always maintain the same relative order as their original
appearance in the word, and usually they are taken from the beginning
of the word. An example is ceph, which stands for cephalosporin.  
In this article, I provide a useful resource to pathology
informaticians, a listing of more than 12000 abbreviations organized
by polysemy. Upon review of the abbreviations, the author noted that
the abbreviations could be classified by the algorithmic approaches
needed for their correct interpretation. Such a classification may be
of value to informaticians who are designing software to expand
medical abbreviations. The review of abbreviations and the discussion
of the classes of abbreviations are provided with the expectation that
they may have value for programmers in the field. The implementations
of classed algorithms will be the subject of future efforts.
